So how do we do that?
Well, luckily,
there is a handy-dandy bootstrapper
project out there by the Vite
team called create-vite.
Which is analogous to people might
have heard of other create projects,
like create-react-app or
create-next-app or so on and so forth.
And these are becoming
increasingly popular,
because you can use them at the command
line with npm create, and then the name
of the thing that has a creator that
you want to start a new project from.
In this case, Vite.
And, again, we can do this at
syntax to like specify a version.
So if we run npm create
vite@latest in a parent
directory where we want
to have our new project,
we will get a ready-to-go working
Vite app running out of the box.
What this is doing under the hood will
be revealed to us in the command
line when we try it.
Okay, so what I'm gonna do is
go up into a parent directory,
and I'm going to run,
let me know if this is too small.
I'm gonna run npm create vite.
And, again, I'm outside of the,
where am I right now?
vite@latest.
And this is a, you might see an extra
line here where it's like I'm
gonna install this package
called create-vite.
Are you cool with that?
And what it's doing is
installing that globally so
that you can use it wherever
to start a new project.
So this is one of those cases where
like a package is globally useful.
Because this is similar to npm init or
something,
something that we might
use all over the place.
And then what it's doing is essentially
that package has a whole bunch
of templates that it is helping us
pull from to get some starter code.
So we're going to walk through the steps.
Okay, project name.
I'm going to call this
awesome-vite-starter.
You can call it something more fun.
And then we get a whole bunch of [LAUGH]
colorful choices of different frameworks,
Vue and React and Preact and
Svelte and Solid.
We're going to choose Vanilla,
Vanilla JavaScript, just JavaScript.
And the other thing that's becoming
increasingly [LAUGH] popular all over
[LAUGH] JavaScript land,
it seems, is TypeScript.
So a lot of these tools also
have support for TypeScript.
Right now, we're not doing that.
So we're gonna choose JavaScript.
And now it's saying I'm scaffolding
this project in a directory named for
whatever you told me the project
should be named, and I'm done.
And now, here's what you should do.
Move into that new directory,
which we're going to do.
Run npm install, no further arguments,
which is going to.
Well, first of all, let's just see what's
in here in this directory right out of
the box, we got a package json.
That means that if I run
npm install in here,
it's going to look at that package.json
and do whatever it said to do.
So we're NPM installing,
it added 10 packages.
Interestingly, fewer than cowsay
[LAUGH] and is auditing them and
everything, same as before.
And then, the instructions before said,
now we can do something
called npm run dev.
So we're just gonna implicitly trust
that this is fine, and npm run dev.
Okay, now, you're just going to
probably not say all of this.
All of these ports are in use because you
keep doing this so many times, Anjana.
But it's going to essentially,
what it's done, npm run dev.
That's got to be a script, so
we can go look at that in a second.
But right now, that script is really
just running Vite, the program Vite.
Which is its own module.
And what Vite is doing is
running a development server,
that's this localhost thing,
that is essentially serving my new
amazing Vite project up for
me locally, just on my machine.
Now if I go to this link, and
then I'll zoom in a little bit,
I have a pretty looking page, but
all right, does it actually do anything?
Let's try clicking this button.
And this is sort of MVP, minimum
viable app [LAUGH] for a Vite project,
but it is a functional
client-side JavaScript program.
So what we've got is a very great program
that has a button that keeps a counter.
And it is running client-side, so like if
I refresh, it's not saved in a database or
anything.
But we're gonna look at a second at
why there's actually like a whole
bunch of goodies here.
Which then now we can use to
start making our lives easier and
not having to download
Anjana's .html files and
refresh them in our browser
every time we want to.
We're going to poke around
in Vite a little bit.
Why don't we do what every
inspired dev does and
go poke around at stuff
we don't understand.
So let us go into now.
All right, I'm going to Ctrl+C
to kill this dev server.
I'm going to open a new code window in my
awesome-vite-starter project, which again,
I'm gonna make this a little smaller so
that it all fits [LAUGH] on screen.
Okay, what have we got here?
Let's find out.
Well, we know we have a package.json.
That's the starting point of NPM.
So let's look at that.
Let's see what's going on.
Okay, stuff we recognize.
Type: module, cool, private true,
interesting, interesting.
You can have private npm modules.
You can have npm packages,
you can have public packages,
depending on who you want
to be able to access it.
We've got a type module, so we know we
can use that import statement, awesome.
And we have some scripts out of the box.
We already got familiar with dev,
which we did npm run dev.
And that runs the local development
server, which essentially is
only useful to me as a developer,
as I am working on this code base.
But we also have the command build,
which is just a shortcut to vite build,
which is going to build our site or
app in this case, for production.
So this is going to do some different
things than in the development
environment.
And so now, we're getting into
the world of, our lives as JavaScript
developers often happen in a world
that does not look exactly the same as
the world where our end users
are gonna ultimately see our code.
For example, we wanna be able to
do things like edit a file and
instantly see the changes.
And we wanna be able to do things like
mess around with some of the settings
without it kind of breaking everything or
changing all of our file names.
[LAUGH] It's not that
not breaking anything.
But we, in order to do that, might lose
some of the optimizations and some of the,
so it might be a trade-off, rather,
between some of the optimizations and
some of the polish and some of
the fanciness that we might want to do.
Some of the processing that
we might wanna do on our code
before we ship it out to the world.
Thinking of the old days when you used to
get like a CD or a floppy disk even in
the mail, because some developer was like,
all right, this code is good enough.
I'm putting it on this physical media and
I am physically sending it to you.
Now we don't do it physically,
but we do have to send our website to
the internet for people to look at.
So that is what the build command does.
It does some different things than
when we are running this site locally.
There is also a preview command,
which essentially runs a local server
that shows you the built version of
your site rather than the diversion.
So we can we can poke around with it
this and see what that looks like.
But let us continue exploring
what's happening here.
We have a new section in our package.json,
devDependencies.
And we don't have that dependencies that
we had before when we installed cowsay.
And this brings up a great
point that in npm,
in Node packages,
there are some dependencies
that we only need as developers for
this project.
Tooling, test suites,
whatever other conveniences we might need,
and things that help us deal
with our types and whatnot.
But then there are dependencies, and so
those are things we need at the time
that we're writing the software.
But then there are dependencies that
we need at the time we are running
the software to actually do
the thing that the software does.
And those are the regular dependencies.
So dev dependencies will not be installed
when somebody just installs our project.
Sorry, when somebody
just uses our project.
They will only be installed for
us if we are in that project and
it's not some dependency up
the tree of our node modules.
So this helps keep that tree a little bit
smaller, even though it's still massive.